What do you expect to happen?
Write down a list of everything you expect from this process. How do you imagine the awakening will make you feel, what will it be like, and what do you want it to be like?
It is good to recognize the expectations you have for awakening. It will be nothing like what you expect. Here we are not looking for an experience or an altered mind-state. This is not a quick path to eternal bliss or anything like that. We are looking for a simple recognition of reality. That is all.
This is not a project where you gather information, cover lots of different angles, lay out the results, and draw conclusions. It is about looking within your experience to see what the “I” is. It is about taking an honest look. It’s not about thoughts.
While it is good to put a lot of energy into this inquiry, it doesn’t require quiet time. We are just observing normal life, doing everyday activities.
There is nothing that needs to happen. Expecting some grand realization gets in the way of real seeing. Everything already is as it always is.
“True nature” or “truth” is the simplest thing there is, but it gets lost under the piles of crap that get heaped upon it. Then confusion happens. All you need to do is let stuff go. Drop it. Clear the way. Wipe the sleep from your eyes.
Let go of all the beliefs, all the gurus or masters, all the books you have read or seminars you have followed. They won’t help here. This is not something learned; it is something to see. It comes in different ways, but when you know it, you know it. The present moment is the only truth.
Don’t look to “liberated others” to define your own knowing. Everyone is different, and every karma-stream is different. With some there is a huge “pop” (like a champagne cork), and with others a soft pop. In the end, the knowing that you have truly seen through self is truly yours. Otherwise this would be persuasion, not investigation.
This work does not aim to trigger certain types of altered states of consciousness. These may happen (or not), yet they are entirely beside the point. What these conversations are intended to do is invite you to simply look directly at what is already the case right now, regardless of whatever state of consciousness may be happening.
The wish for a final “done” is surprise, surprise a story of the final carrot to be reached, a reason for the fictional “I” to try to get “somewhere.” Everything is constantly changing, moving, and interacting. There is no “done” in the real world. If you want to be at home, be at home in the flow.
This isn’t about making the sense of being alive stronger or experienced more clearly. It’s simply about seeing what is real when you are not subject to the “I” illusion.
You do not have to have a spiritual history or a certain number of hours of meditation to see the truth. This has nothing to do with enhanced states, nor is any prior knowledge needed. All you need is the desire to see, no matter what, and the will to engage with this inquiry fully. Honesty is your best friend.
The aim of this inquiry is not to give security. It is to see through illusion to reality. And in that process, we find that the person looking for security doesn’t exist. Then the need for finding security and the need for answers falls away, too.
Nothing changes after awakening. It is just a way to see things differently, without a “self” involved, and without thoughts gripping the mind for hours about who and how you are. This is a peace.
In awakening, the belief in a solid, controlling self is dropped. All of a sudden it is seen there really wasn’t anything to do, because nothing could be done. It is the realizing that there is nothing to realize. Thoughts arise, the body acts, and life is lived, but it is not happening to anyone.
What we are doing here is not about state of oneness. It’s not about a fleeting state that comes and goes. It does not require meditation or sitting in silence. It is about showing the mind what is real and what is imaginary.
We are not going to take anything away. What you take to be your self is an illusion. We are simply going to see this. We will see how this delusion distorts reality and causes all of your suffering.
Can you remember some occasion when you realized that something you previously believed to be true, actually wasn’t? Have you ever come to realize that your views on something prevented you from seeing the thing as it is? Probably yes. So how would the world change if “you” didn’t exist? What if everything you had believed to be “you” was be seen to be an illusion? That’s one description of awakening. You see that you are not the body, feelings, or thoughts.
We’re not looking for a specific kind of feeling, or even something out-of-the-ordinary. We’re looking to see what has always already been the case no separation. No “in here,” no “out there,” no “me here, the rest of the world out there.” It’s always been like this and will always be like this.
If there is no belief in a separate “you,” then there are no expectations. Life is just experience unfolding. Expectations are nothing more than thoughts.
All we are doing here is seeing through the illusion that there is a separate self. You are not going to change your stripes for spots. You are not going to become a saint. You will not disappear. You never were in the first place. The world will be the same world you are experiencing now. The difference is that the story of self will be seen through; the chattering of mind that cries ownership will be seen to be a lie; the thoughts that busily smooth over the holes in experience will be seen to be fantasy. You will simply notice that you have a new perspective, and that you no longer believe in a separate self.
Look closely at the most precious beliefs that are close to the heart, those in the “no-touch” zone. They are the ones that you really need to inspect up close. You will recognize them by the feeling of resistance. Follow resistance. It is here to let you know that another bit of the lie is sitting somewhere, waiting to be noticed.
Realization feels like waking up in a dream. You haven’t left the dream, and nothing looks any different, but there is a feeling that whatever you are is vastly different than what you have previously taken yourself to be. This realization creates a feeling of wonder. You will see at a deeper level how powerful the illusion created by the mind is.
There really is no liberation as such. Who is liberated? No one.
Awakening from the story of self does not mean that all of a sudden all of your problems are going to vanish that there will suddenly be no more tough emotions or challenging situations. This is not about getting away from difficulty, pain, and suffering. Not at all. These are, and will remain, part of the drama of living a human life. So please don’t consider difficult feelings and overwhelming thoughts as a sign that you’re never going to get this, or you’re doing things wrong.
Tell me, does a tree “mean” anything? How about a bug, a bird, or a flower? Does life need a meaning to carry on life-ing? Do you see how humans seek for a meaning and put one where it isn’t just to feel special? What is specialness? What if you are not special at all? Uniqueness is at the core of everything. There are no two same leaves on a tree, no two same flowers, no two same humans. Is uniqueness special? Do you need to be special to be unique? Do you need to seek meaning in order to be unique?
That restless, compulsive searching for that one bit of knowledge that one experience, that one insight that will make everything okay is the condition a lot of seekers are in, and it can go on for decades, because there is literally nothing, no bit of knowledge, no specific experience nor insight, that will satisfy you. There is no “you.” Dissatisfaction with what is, is the essence of the illusory self. The self exists (in appearance) due to that very dissatisfaction.
Seeing no-self is like getting the diagnostic manual for suffering. One has the means to get to the root of the “problem” which is only a thought.
It is as if you all your life thought you were paralyzed, sitting in a wheelchair. Then a doctor tells you that there has been a diagnosis that actually you are healthy. The doctor proves it, and you see he is right. But you still have to get up and go by yourself, instead of staying in the wheelchair and finding reasons why not. Actually, it is much easier than that. There is not even a wheelchair. You have been walking yourself the whole time it was only a hypnotically induced belief that made you think you were in a wheelchair!
When you mistake a rope for a snake, the rope is still a rope in reality, and the fear is a bodily reaction to a wrong perception. When the rope is seen as a rope, the fear is gone, together with the illusion of the snake. There is only a change in perception when you really see that the “I” is an illusion.
The whole universe is one unified existence that is in a constant state of transformation and change and movement and functioning. So the change of seasons, the transformation of forms, death and life, and all the rest, are the functioning of that oneness. It is a seamless flow of forms, as the continual creation of all.
Freedom does not mean freedom from feelings, thoughts, judgments, obsessions, or experiences. All these are part of the flow of life. Freedom consists of recognizing that all this is happening to no one.
The thought processes will keep happening for all eternity. That is what’s happening. The wind blows, and thought processes happen. Sometimes you are aware of them immediately, sometimes later. You don’t expect them to stop, do you?
Liberation is not a thought, feeling, or state. It is really so ordinary that we have almost totally missed it. It is through direct experience that it is seen. Look with fresh eyes at the truth of common everyday experience. It’s not hidden; it’s just a shift in perspective. Each person is different. So don’t expect fireworks, as they may not happen. All of the emotions we have had in the past are still here; it just seems there is much less stickiness to them.
This is easier to approach from a place of not-knowing. Some of what you expect may occur. Our world reality does not alter with our liberation; only our perspective alters, our way of being in the world.
Outside of your perception, nothing changes with awakening. The world is as wonderfully ordinary as it was beforehand. You just become more aware of it, as you’re no longer caught up in the stories you tell yourself about yourself. It’s like experiencing life directly, rather than through a filter. It’s as if everything suddenly becomes very simple. The world of words and concepts no longer clutters everything.
Imagine having blurry eyesight that came on so slowly you didn’t notice you weren’t seeing as clearly as before. Then someone hands you glasses with just the right prescription for you. Everything appears different. Has anything changed? Absolutely not.
One person who saw no-self could not stop laughing once she saw exactly how the mind was creating the story about life, while life was just doing its thing. She could not stop laughing for days after this. It is that simple.
