There is a Zen saying that the birds have no desire to be reflected in the lake, the lake has no desire to reflect the birds, but it still happens. The birds are reflected, the lake reflects, although the desire exists neither on the part of the birds nor on the part of the lake.
It’s very freeing to see how roles play out naturally, and the story unfolds effortlessly. All is happening to no one, for no reason. Life is simply going on. It’s safe to retire from being the “general manager” of life.
The most important thing is that this is not the end of the road. It’s the first step of an awakened, authentic life. While the belief in a separate and real “you” may be gone, chances are, a big part of the ego-based structure built on top of that belief is still in place. How big, only you can know. It is likely that at some point doubts will come up, reactions that may be considered “not useful” will happen, and (possibly deep) negativity will arise. The important thing here is that all these things used to cling to, and be fueled through, the idea of self, which is now seen as an illusion. So whenever thoughts or emotions come up that are judged to be negative, don’t avoid, don’t fight, don’t argue. Just stay with them, and watch them happen and unfold. It’s not personal, so it has nowhere to stick to. This kind of cleanup is obviously not a pleasant process, but you’ll likely realize that it actually works. All you have to do is take your hands off the steering wheel and let things burn when they are set on fire.
If “you” do not exist, how is there a “you” that is still attached to the body and mind? There are feelings, there are thoughts, but they just are. There has never been a self, and these feelings and thoughts have always been here. Just because you know the truth that you do not exist, and there is no owner of thoughts and feelings, it does not mean they will magically go away. However, now that the brain has seen through the illusion, why would the illusion of ownership and doer-ship be believed any longer?
After awakening, identification with self sometimes happens, but usually not for long. Consciousness unmasks the belief, or life does. Identification with a story is also part of the story. Attachment to pleasure and fear of pain are also stories. There is nothing that attaches. There is only a story about attachment.
Does the “I” pop up? So what! There is emptiness behind it. Go back to that emptiness and stare at it. Get familiar with it, focus on it, and let it wash over all that is still arising as doubt. See that the “I” is empty and it’s okay for it to be here. It’s just a word. You have to use the word “I,” as without it, it would be difficult to communicate. It does not mean that an entity pops up. “I” is just another thought passing by.
Perhaps it is possible to fall back into the fog if you stay stuck somewhere for long enough. But once no-self is realized seen truly and fully then no-self becomes a tool to help through any times of disillusionment, since you have something solid to compare the fluff to.
What is seen cannot be unseen. But that does not mean that you can never get lost in the story again. It’s like watching a movie and getting sucked into it. Once you look, you know: it’s a movie, not real life. So once you look, you know it’s a story and not reality.
Now that you’ve woken up, come join our forum at Liberation Unleashed
