The substance of a story is ideas, thoughts, and habits. Do you see that? Can you get a clear view of that?
What are stories made of? Look more closely at this question. If someone just met you on the street, could they know any of your story except the part where you were meeting on the street? They could see your body, but not your story. What tools would you use to convey to them the supposed reality of a self, with a past, a present, and a future?
Apart from the tools (words, images, and sounds) you use to remember and convey a story, does a story of “you” actually exist?
The only reason you think your story exists is because you’re so used to focusing on it. If you didn’t keep bringing it up in your thoughts and acting as if it was there there would be nothing that would keep it alive. Nobody else would know it existed. It exists only so long as you buy into it. You are the only one keeping the stories around. They don’t exist if you don’t keep remembering them and then telling other people about them.
It’s an illusion that there is a “you” that is living your life. There’s just life and the movement of life.
An “I” story is a high-maintenance story. It is a lot of work caring for something that isn’t there.
The illusion of “I” is born when mind, in complete innocence, believes that it is a separate human body. Another body a feeding, nurturing body talks to it and calls it “Baby,” “Timmy,” “Good boy!” And in an innocent unquestioned moment, a believer in “self” is born.
Soon after birth, you were given a name and a bunch of data to help identify you: length; weight; eye color; date and time of birth; parents’ names; and so on. You were now a little person who had a whole bunch of words and pictures associated with you. Over time, as you grew up, made friends, participated in activities, attended school, and landed a job, many adjectives and qualities were stuck to you, in the same way you might put a sticky note on a white board. These were invisible sticky labels, though. They lived inside and were fed by belief, attention, and the meaning given to them. It’s quite natural to know yourself as your name, your title, roles, and positive or negative qualities that have come to define you. We are told we are good, kind, talented. Or that we are bad, lazy, worthless. We also learn to connect our value to the job we have and how much money we earn. Our self-image gets a boost when we get a promotion and think that we’ve made it now. These are all words and ideas about who we think we are.
As babies we are not separate from our world. There is no place where baby begins or ends. Then the story of a separate self is begun by our parents and family who tell us who “we” are. By around three years old, the story of separation is complete, and we add our own bits to it as we grow up.
If you remember what happened when you were five years old, it comes in the form a story, recreated every time, perhaps slightly differently every time, but all just a fiction. Remember a movie you saw recently. There is a story in a movie, with made-up characters, yet the characters appear real. They have their likes, their dislikes, and their ways of dealing with situations. It is the same with the character “you.” It appears to be a real character, but is there anything solid in its story? It’s all made up from thoughts about it.
At a very young age, we are told that our body and thoughts are ours. We are given a name and identity and are led to believe that this identity is in control and is responsible for everything we do. It is an identity that exists solely in thought, and it can lead to thought-based stories of tragedy or delight. But look directly at it. The “I” itself is a thought only. It does not refer to anything in reality. And you can’t control your thoughts ultimately. They just appear out of nowhere, with no author. You can see this just by observation or, even better, with the help of someone who has seen through the illusion.
Someone talks about you in a disparaging way, and hurt and anger arise. Or perhaps praise and adoration fall upon you, and you believe you are special and wonderful. Either way, you are buying into a story about a self, and you are going to cling to it one day and resist it the next. You have become trapped on a roller coaster you can never get off. Life will take you up and down, and the mind will keep layering on this data as proof of your identity.
An insult provokes an emotional response only when it is identified with. If someone were to call you “too blurry,” there would be no suffering in that because no part of the mind would believe that. If, however, you were called “too fat,” it’s much more likely that that might be believed and identified with. If someone were to insult your family or even country, that would also provoke an emotional response because of identification with them. Flattery, of course, is the same in the opposite direction.
Can you see that “I am a good person,” “I am a bad person,” “I am attractive,” and “I am ugly” are all just thoughts that arise? That “positive” thoughts are thoughts that complement the “I” and that “negative” thoughts are thoughts that disparage the “I”? Now can you look at what these thoughts are pointing to? There are thoughts of “I am a good person.” What is the “I” that is the good person? What is the “I” that is the bad person?
Self-evaluation boils down to there being something “wrong” with you. You believe you suffer from a character defect. Then there is a movement to create a better, nicer, more lovable self, who will attract good things, be important, right, and beautiful.
If you just look at the bad feelings that arise without the story the “I” story then they dissolve. If the story is believed, the feelings go on for hours or days. But without the story that is, seeing the story as a story the feelings and sensations in the body hang around for a much shorter time. There is more freedom in that more ease, more space, more peace.
And as long as there is a “you” with all these labels and features, then there is also the “other” with its own labels, who can threaten and harm you. Living in a world of separation perpetuates conflict, violence, and the painful story of loneliness.
The answer to the great yearning of life for fulfilment and satisfaction is not in the mind. It is right here and now, in seeing through the false, apparent reality of the controller “me.” Without that story, life flows more easily, more freely, and it is free of psychological suffering through apparent good times or bad.
The “self” is a story, a fiction. It works like a computer program. Certain inputs produce certain results, although sometimes there can be glitches or unexpected results. There may seem to be triumphs or disasters, but these are still just stories, whether beautiful or sad.
Imagine a child totally immersed in the belief of a tooth fairy. Everybody around her thinks tooth fairies are real. She doesn’t have a chance to discover the truth. Every “sane” child believes there is a real tooth fairy. As soon as she catches the tooth fairy her mother in action, the belief disappears. The story is revealed to be a story. The child can’t believe in it anymore, even if she wanted to. Now let’s investigate how much substance is there to self. You just have to catch the “self” in action, that is, observe the processes as they concoct the illusion of self in real time. Then you’ll know the truth.
Your “own” story has absolutely no relevance to you! Without the narrative in thought (not reality), it would not exist, nor be maintained. Look at this dubious and changeable history of a self. We tell our stories and memories to other people as if they were real. We use words to identify things as ours: “my” computer, for example. It is truer to say that it’s “a” computer. The word “computer” is not the same as the computer itself, of course. It’s just a verbal pointer. Please take a moment to look at the computer and think about this. Is the word the actual thing? What happens in your mind when you say the word “computer”? When you’ve done that, say: “My computer.” A whole new story starts. There may be lot of thoughts about the computer. Are any of them real? Please check.
The mind gets caught in all the stories it is fed and begins to dictate how you behave, who you spend time with, and how you engage with life. The “self” we take ourselves to be is fearful, restless, anxious, and defensive. The desire arises to protect this “self” from the threat of what others say, do, and feel. Everything in life seems to be about “you,” and that makes it impossible to simply be.
Do you think there is a sufferer from which thoughts appear? Isn’t that just another thought? “There is a sufferer here.” “There is no sufferer here.” Both are equally just thoughts, a story about suffering.
Your own “story” has absolutely no relevance to you. You can’t be sure that your memory is correct, or that your feelings haven’t changed since the last time you experienced something. So you don’t actually gain anything by keeping the stories around. You could just look at each moment fresh, and be better off because you’re not carrying around all this baggage.
Look at the story of you from the eyes of your best friend, a parent, a colleague, a stranger on the street. Is it the same story? How does it change depending on a point of view? How does it change depending on your mood? Is there a true story or is it all fiction?
Imagine a movie with “you” as the main character. It’s a cool movie, sometimes exciting, sometimes tragic. But at all times, it is only a story, and you are not real. Oh, and by the way, there’s also no director, no screen, and no audience at this movie.
Ego is just a concept based on the belief in separate self.
In the “story of me” there is always trying to make things different than they are right now, as if to drive away anxiety. In reality, this moment is as it is because it cannot be different. There cannot be less anxiety. The relations between the environment, genes, conditioning, the weather, and everything else make it what it is. You might just as well allow this moment to be as it is. Maybe then the fear will dissolve (if the weather is right).
The idea of attaching a real thing to a mental construct is ridiculous. It only seems to exist because most people believe in it so strongly. But there’s not actually any evidence that the self is real. We try to attach a real something to what is basically nothing, and we get upset when everybody else doesn’t go along with our make-believe story.
There is no self. The “I” is made up have you noticed? Have you looked inside and ever literally found this “I,” this self you have been referring to your whole life? Would you like to take the time to see? It can end the seeing story of this “I,” which will keep you on an endless search for a happiness that is already there “I need,” “I want,” “I can’t,” “I am not enough” and so on and so on. It could liberate you from the painful story of “I” and all the thoughts that attach to it to protect it and keep it safe. Yet it does not exist.
The mind thinks it needs an “I” to exist, yet this is not true. Would you like to go inside and see for yourself? Do a walk-through and check it out? This cannot hurt you. The only thing that can happen is that you could see the truth for yourself. All you need is curiosity and trust.
The mind is playing a great trick which is believed that the individual is the author of their life. We have never gone directly looking to find this “you,” which is supposedly a separate entity that is controlling and directing your life, just accepting this is true. But this “you” cannot be found if we go directly looking for it because it does not exist. Life is just happening by itself. You don’t exist separate from life, but as life’s experiences. There is no loss experienced on seeing this because the belief in a separate “you” causes all suffering.
The illusion of “me” is very convincing. But it cannot stand up to examination. Once the mind sees how it’s created, it ceases to have power. It’s like Santa once you know he is not real, you’ll never write a letter to Santa again. And what happens to Santa when the truth is realized?
Thoughts build a small me, a grandiose me, a miserable me, an awakened me. The variations are endless. And it doesn’t stop. Just as optical illusions keep working, the imaginary self keeps getting built. But that doesn’t make it true "self."
We perceive things. Labelling happens immediately, and then the stories start. It feels like the “I” is the controller. But is it really? Or is the “I” just another story?
There was a time and place where people had certain rituals every day for making the sun rise again. They thought they had control over the sun’s behavior. And to them it was so “obvious” their rituals worked!
The believe in a self, soul, or personal essence resembles animistic beliefs that the sun is alive, that there are gods in the trees, that a falling stone “wants” to fall. It is an unnecessary hypothesis. You are the product of your genes and your upbringing. There is no room, no necessity, and no possibility for the existence of a personal essence.
You might be on the right track with your philosophizing, but slow down and look what is going on instead. Otherwise you will end up with interesting theories instead of the simple seeing of reality.
Do you want to “unbite” the apple? To unbite the apple is to get unplugged from the illusion of “you.” This is an enormous freedom. Life continues as before, but there is a silence in which perception intensifies. Instead of being filtered through thoughts, the experience of life is raw and direct. You may have tried many ways to get unplugged reading a million books, meditating, rebirthing, and so on. All of these were necessary to make you burn for real freedom.
Life isn’t personal. Your life isn’t personal. You and your experience are one, not two. There is no “you” living a life. There is life as you experience it, and that is you. It happens with and without the thoughts of “me,” “myself,” and “I.” Life is intimate but not personal. You have no need to protect and defend yourself, not because everything’s going to be alright and the universe is friendly (although that may also be the case), but because there is no “you” who can do anything. Your self doesn’t exist except as a thought that refers to nothing.
The conditioning that accumulates since childhood is like coat after coat being put over reality, so that life becomes more and more weighty and confined. One by one, these coats can disappear and dissolve. Each time this happens, it is a small liberation. The experience of life becomes more and more direct, with more and more freedom in the experiencing. Trust in life grows.
The self is only habitually reinforced neural pathways. Awareness of the right hand can be brought about any time at will, so the mind incorporates the right hand into the sense of self. The same goes for memories, which are just events perceived by the body. But since the body has been conceptualized in the mind (as “me”), anything that affects the body is seen as happening to the whole of “me.”
The brain likes to theorize and then prove its theories. So you’ll think something “I’m angry,” for example and then confirm to yourself how true it is. The brow is tense, the face is hot, the fists clench. And then you’ll start to think about just how very angry you are, at whom, and why. You’ve given yourself a script, and you will follow it to its end because it makes for an interesting adventure for the brain.
Look at it this way. Thought thinking something leads to believing something, which leads to assuming that something needs to happen with or to the body. There is nobody home, yet demands are made of others. It happens all day long, everywhere. This is the falsity of “I” showing up and pretending to be real.
Years and years ago, you got curious about having a personality and decided to play with the possibility. You’ve experimented with dozens of character traits over the years to figure out what “shape” your personality should have. But all this has been like decorating an imaginary Christmas tree. There never was anything to hang those qualities on. If you look really closely really honestly you’ll discover that the truth is that there never was a you to begin with.
The “I” does not wake up, since it does not exist. It is seen that the only place that an “I” exists is in a thought about oneself (a self-image) that arises from time to time. A thought happens, an I-thought happens, and then another thought happens that says something like, “I just had a thought.” And all this happens with no actual, personal self being there. Do you see this? The I-thought happens frequently enough for it to arise and claim arising thought as its own. The frequently arising I-thought, and the identification with it, is an old habit learned when you were a toddler. But this can be seen And identification released.
Thoughts call out what has happened; describe the experiences to the other thoughts which together make a story with a beginning, middle, and an end. Thoughts are distractions, irrelevant to what is happening now. It’s like the commentary in sports. If the television is muted, the game still happens. The players don’t know that the commentary has stopped, and they don’t care. The game is still real and still just as much fun.
Humans suffer so much because there is such an investment in the self-image or persona that has been built up over the years. And why wouldn’t you try and protect yourself, if you really were in danger? But all these concepts we have about ourselves are simply adopted, taken to be true, and never investigated. What if you just stopped for a moment to question some of these ideas you have about yourself? Can you really find a bad person? If you are always growing, working at different jobs, changing residences, beginning and ending relationships, playing in a constant flow, then can you really say what you are? Can you be pinned down and defined by any one moment or experience?
All these sensations, feelings, and thoughts are there. They are life doing its thing. “I” is a story, which is a thought on top of life. You can name it, make more poetry about it, and use it for practical purposes, but in reality it is empty.
The “I” is a figment of almost every living human’s imagination. At a very young age, from the time you start to know your name, comes the process of identification with this image of yourself as an “I.” “That’s me,” you tell yourself. “This is my stuff, my face, my body, my family, my life”.“Look in the mirror! That’s me!” The stories start, and the “I” is at the center of every one. “I did this” and “I did that.” “I know this,” and “I know that.” Everything that comes into contact with the “I” sticks to it. Good and bad. The “I” likes it or hates it and every shade in between.
The “I” is almost never satisfied. It gets what it thinks it wants, and then something else is wanted. The “I” is deeply afraid it won’t exist someday and is continuously concocting schemes to protect itself and to get what it wants. It doesn’t know that it is feeling separation, yet it still experiences a deep feeling that something is missing or not whole. There is no end to it. Even though you can’t find an “I” anywhere in reality, this truth lies unquestioned by the world.
The “me” is an imaginary entity that exists only in thoughts about “me”. It attaches a “me,” “mine,” “yours,” and “theirs” to thoughts about the world. My husband, my child, my job, my philosophy, my rights. Without a “me,” is it the end of the world as we know it? And without a “me” in thoughts, does the world disappear?
If you stop for one second to take a hard look at the reality of your personal “I” and try to locate it looking without the baggage of religion, spirituality, or beliefs just simply looking as a simple innocent kid there exists the possibility that you could see that you were wrong all along. Hearing, seeing, feeling, heart pumping, and breathing happen, with or without this “I.” Then you realize that the “I” or “me” is just a thought, like any other thought that has no substance. All suffering stems from this thought. All dramas were created by it. True liberation starts by liberating yourself from yourself.
Everything is running on automatic. If you watch a great movie and get sucked up in a good part, then zoom out, you see it’s a movie, though for a few minutes the focus was completely on what was going on in the scene. This is also happening in real life. There is zooming in and out of character. Identification with the story is also part of story. Attachment to pleasure and fear of pain are also stories. There is nothing that attaches, only the story about attachment.
Every time there is a story about a future, it may trigger depression: “Things will stay the same,” “I cannot or don’t want to change,” “I might have no job/no money/no assets/no relationships,” “I might get sick,” or “I don’t want to die destitute and alone.” The core feeling behind all the other feelings is fear fear of change, fear of people in general. The fear is derived from very early childhood and being attacked. It is just deep conditioning that has stayed in the body and mind.
What is the future, anyway? It is a completely made-up thing. There is no future (or past), except in the mind. There is only really the now. And it’s always now! Focusing on an imaginary “me” on a path to an imaginary future is a piece of runaway fiction.
What is the payoff for clinging to the stories that you know are stories? Experience arises in this moment. Life is experience arising, in each moment. Now. Now. Now. You perceive a lot of your experience not directly, but through images of that experience. Not as word-thoughts, but as image-thoughts. The sense of self seems to arise from that image, as it seems solid and unmoving and corresponds to images of yourself in the past. In reality, there are only sounds, sensations, sights, tastes, and smells. The payoff for clinging to untrue stories is another story.
If you watch a movie, you forget that you are looking at a screen. You become totally involved in the story that is being displayed. In the same way, all the thoughts that arise about your self are just like pictures on a screen. In this way you realize they are just that thoughts passing by. No matter whether they are about the weather or “me,” there is no difference. Just images on a screen. “Me” is a thought like any other. There never was an entity, person, or thing called “me.” There has only ever been a story.
Thoughts about yourself may arise, but this can be seen to be just another thought a thought about a thought. So what? Another thought comes, and another. So what? Thoughts do not mean anything. If a thought is thought to mean something, another thought has just arisen.
Can the unreal be a problem? If you know that all thoughts are about the real or the unreal, but are never themselves the real, do they have to be taken so seriously?
There is a play-acting of seriousness going on rather than an actual real life tragedy. The whole world-drama is like a vast movement and field of intertwining energies. One movement appears to be many, each happening on its own.
THERE IS SOMETHING HAPPENING. Please re-read this a hundred thousand times. This is it. There is something happening. All the rest is story.
