Do you ever experience a sense of terror when looking at reality too closely as though you’ll discover something you didn’t want to know? You’re right! This work is not easy. But why live in denial, where all that straining causes you suffering that doesn’t need to be there?
For some people, this process can be really intense. Don’t fight it, allow it. Go with it. Let it rip. Face it. Ask the question, is it true that there is no separate self whatsoever in reality? Let the doubt in. Ask for the truth to be revealed.
Is the fear of freedom bigger than the desire for freedom? Are you letting fear win this game? Face it head on, without any reservations. Ask the fear what precisely is it protecting. See if there is anything that needs to be protected. What comes up here? Bring that fear closer for examination. What is behind it?
When you become aware of anxiety about this process, the mind tends to distract itself away from the anxiety and the “hunting.” Look directly at the anxiety. Pinpoint its message. Is it “If there is no self, I will disappear?” Or “Without a self, I will cease to exist?” Sometimes it’s “Without a self, nothing will get done.” Check and find out what the anxiety is. Then ask, “Is it true?”
You will not disappear. You cannot. You never “were” in the first place. Existence exists and always has and always will. What does not exist is this “you” the imaginary ownership of a piece of existence.
Let whatever comes, come. Just look at it, even fear. Notice that the fear is the result of what is being thought.
Consider any fear you have of no-self to be a protective mechanism. It is doing its job perfectly, and it is a loyal friend and protector. Can you look at the fear itself, how it works, and where it is felt in the body? Ask it to come closer. Check that raw feeling. Is it personal? Ask it what it is protecting. What is it that it does not want you to find out? Bow to it. Thank it, and look behind the fear as if you would be taking a peek with curiosity. What is behind it?
Life is perfect, now, apart from the thought that “I can make better or worse decisions” the fear that “I” can get things right or wrong. That is “selfing.” Fear is the motor, or the energy supply, of a “me” or of the sense of a separate individual. But it is like a circular argument. The belief in self is there to protect the self, but without the belief in self there’s no self to protect.
Fear is your friend. It is trying to protect you. In this case, it is not fear of a real danger. There are no snakes. It is trying to protect you from something imagined something that might happen, something that might happen if you see clearly. What are the possible consequences if total dis-identification with the story occurs? Do you think you are going to become an unmotivated zombie or something?
The next time fear arises, welcome it. Bring that fear closer for examination. Look at the mechanics of it. Observe and study how it works. What do you notice? Ask the fear to reveal its wisdom. Ask it what it is protecting. Thank it for doing its job so perfectly.
We are afraid to lose our story because it has become so familiar and dear to us. What would we be without it? It’s worth taking the time to find out because what you keep looking for (so you can finally relax) is what you already are. No accomplishment, external fame, material stuff, or appreciation will ever fulfill you.
Life is just “life-ing.” Anxiety may appear from time to time, but there is no one there to attach to it. It is seen that that “me” is just passing by as a thought in the thought-sensation stream.
Doubt is to be expected, And it’s not an enemy. It only points to unresolved “stuff.” Once seeing happens, the whole structure of belief starts to fall like dominoes. Don’t fear it; welcome it. There is no one to control it. Just trust the process and let it be okay.
