Look at the mind as an automatic labelling machine, a narrator without an on-off switch. Look around you now. Notice how thoughts spring up and label objects, tell a story about things, how they got there, without your having any control over them. Thoughts are just that labels that point to things, senses or ideas.
Continue to view the mind as a labelling machine. Its purpose is to name what the senses perceive, to label feelings, and to narrate the story. Sit for a couple of minutes with your eyes closed and notice what the mind does. Don’t pay much attention to content, but observe how the labelling mechanism works. A sound is heard and thoughts describe what happened. A tingling sensation comes and thoughts label it. Just pay attention to how something is experienced and then labeled immediately afterward. See how everything runs on automatic.
The mind labels everything that it focuses on. Look around the room slowly. Notice how mind immediately starts telling stories and names things. When we acquire language, the mind learns to label actions: “I walk,” “I talk,” “I type,” “I breathe,” “I digest,” “I sleep,” etc. If you change these labels to: “walking,” “talking,” “typing,” “breathing,” what happens? Is there an actual “I” that does the actions, or is it just a word that is serving as subject in the label? Is there a subject in doing? While watching breathing, is there an “I” that breathes? Is there an “I” that wakes up in the morning? Is there an “I” that goes to sleep? Is there an “I” in any doing?
A sound is heard, and thoughts about it arise. The eyes rest on an object, and the object gets labeled. Watch this. Wherever you are, focus on what is going on around, and notice how the mind names everything and tells stories about it.
When attention changes from a sound to something else, very quickly a memory of the sound plays back in mind. There may be a related thought, which may be a judgment or recognition. That thought (the memory of the sound) can be mistaken for a perception of the sound, but the sound has already been heard. So there is a gap between the hearing and the thought that manifests after it.
Your name is a label applied to a process, by the process. This label and all others are not actual objects or subjects. Labels are not real things in the sense that terms such as pride, honor, blame, etc., can’t apply to them. Labels can only point to objects or ideas.
Look at language and how it is constructed. There are labels for objects: “table,” “car,” “body,” “thought,” “feeling,” “fear,” and so on. There are labels for activities: “I breathe,” “I cough,” “I scratch an itch,” “I run,” “I feel.” There is an object doing an action, according to the way that language is composed. It’s an assumption that has never been questioned. If there were no language, there would not be an “I.” It’s a label.
Thoughts layer concepts over the direct experiences. A thought (concept or label) is never the actual. Some thoughts point to the actual, and some point to other thoughts, but the content of every single thought is just a story.
The “sense of self” label should not be mistaken for an actual self. It is just a label. If you take a jacket and stick a label on it that reads “Armani,” is the jacket now a real Armani?
What kind of a word is “I”? To what does it refer?
There is no “I” or “me” except as labels, words, thoughts. There is no “I” reading this no “reader,” no “one” reading. There is just reading happening here.
“I” is not a place where thoughts appear. “I” is a thought. It appears and disappears by itself.
The illusion starts when you learn to speak and think in a subject-object kind of way.
Labelling this impersonal life, awareness, and presence with “I” or “me” leads to confusion to the creation of imaginary boundaries and then a belief in them, and a consequent narrowing of experience. Observe how and when you use those labels and how that feels.
At some point, when we learn to speak, we learn to say the word “I.” Does that mean we are given an “I” or “me”? We grow up never questioning that. But the word “I” is like an agreement to use this short sound when we talk about this body and mind to others, instead of using a name. Everyone is called “I.” This name does not automatically create a separate “I” that drives the body around.
Is there a “you” that can get lost in thoughts, or is it just the thoughts, labels which are there, until they disappear again? Thoughts will keep coming. But their content doesn’t have to be believed. Instead of engaging with the content of the thought, watch how it tries to suggest the existence of a vulnerable “I.”
Notice how labels for objects are nouns and labels for actions include an action and a doer: “I type,” “You read,” “I smile,” “You think,” “I walk,” “You talk,” “We sit,” and so on. Examine the labels for actions. See if there is really an “I” that does the breathing, walking, and thinking.
Notice the body breathing. Look is it breathing by itself, or is there a breather? The label says, “I breathe.” Is there really an “I” that does the breathing? How about when you sleep? Is there an “I” that sleeps?
Without the thought “I am breathing,” breathing still happens. Without the thought “I am thinking,” thinking still happens. This extra level of “I” thought is redundant and unnecessary. It’s like an obsessive tic that continues to poke up out of habit and conditioning, feeding on itself. It’s clear to the rational mind that there is no “I,” but the defences are strong.
All the names given to human beings are labels. The pronouns “I,” “you,” “she,” “he,” etc., are used to communicate. The events are happening in the moment. And if you really, really, really follow the “I,” it always comes after the fact and then creates a story. The “I” does not exist in the moment. Life really does flow freely. There really is no “you” running your life. You have to, literally, think outside of the box. You have to see outside of the way you have always seen.
“I,” “my,” and “mine” are simply concepts (labels) that don’t have an actual existence in our direct experience. These concepts are useful in a social context, but understanding that they are simply concepts is very important, because if you believe in them, they distort the way you perceive reality.
The “I” does not exist except in language. It is like naming a location to identify it in relation to other places.
Is this search for the truth something that you do, or is it just happening as part of the story? Is there a “you” that wakes up? What does the word “I” point to? Can an “I” wake up? Can a label “I” see the truth?
Of course, we keep personal pronouns. They help us communicate. But no more than that.
This isn’t about using or not using the words “I” or “me.” They are perfectly useful concepts in day-to-day life. Yet in the direct observation of experience itself, it helps to be clear about words, especially if we’re trying to clarify confusion. So what is the I-ness of the “I,” the you-ness of “you”?
In language, in law, we attach a possessive pronoun to something (as in “my wife”) and act like it’s real. Explore this notion; In “my body”, how is the “my” attached to the body? The idea of attaching anything to a mental construct seems ridiculous. It only seems to exist because most people believe in it so strongly, but there’s not actually any sign that the owner or self is real. This means that, in a sense, we try to attach a real something to what is basically nothing, and we get upset when everybody else doesn’t go along with our make-believe story.
“Self” is a label, a word that points to nothing. It is a story, a fiction that we were initiated into at a very early age and have never questioned. But look. Look through your eyes. Point at an object. It has shape and color. You label it: “Desk.” It is real? When you stop believing in it, it does not disappear. Now point to “you.” Look through your eyes. What do you see?
It is only a matter of language. Feel the difference: “I am sights, sounds, movement” implies “I am the world.” “There are only sights, sounds, movement” implies there is only the world. This is unity, And it is already there. It is only a tiny shift in perspective.
Life goes on, including thoughts about life, and those thoughts are only commentary, not the driving force of life. Look more closely at language and how it works. Every noun points to some object, real or imaginary. Every verb points to an action. Put them both together, and we get a sentence that is a label for movement, for action, for doing. “I walk,” “You read,” “Fingers type,” “Batman flies,” “The table stands.” Is there an “I” in the walking? Is there a “you” in the reading? Does a table “do” standing? Play with this a bit. What is the word “I” pointing to? Is there a doer in the doing? Is there a thinker in thinking?
“I” is a thought. “I am” points to a feeling. That is this feeling of aliveness, of sensations, movement, and being. That feeling has been assumed to be a “me” that is in charge. There is controlling and willing and focusing, and all these experiences are being experienced, but not by an “I.” The “I” is nothing but a thought. Where do thoughts come from?
Thoughts are particularly interesting because, while nobody is experiencing or having a thought, the content of the thought is what carries the “I”. Believing that this thought-content has an actual existence is the illusion. Similarly, the illusion of a separate self arises when you take ownership of a particular experience through the thought “my” or “mine.”
Identification with the body and senses is one of the most common confusions. What experiences a toothache? What senses space or visualizes the body’s orientation? What is the thing that knows the body is experiencing these things? How does it know this is “my” body?
There is a stream of thoughts and sensations, but no “I” you can point to. A thought could come up in this stream, and then a thought may follow and claim that I-thought it, but that I-thought would just be another thought in the thought-sensation stream.
The “I” is not only an imposter, it is also just another thought in the head, the same as any other thought. And thoughts themselves cannot think. There is no “I” that can be found outside of thoughts. Not now, not yesterday, not tomorrow. The reason? It’s not really there!
The notion of identification, as commonly understood, presupposes two elements: something being identified with (thoughts and feelings) and someone doing the identification.
There are no objects, and there is no subject, except by mental imputation. The seen and the seeing are indistinguishable. Everything is as it is and does what it does.
There is no self here except as a label. You might imagine a witness, but what indication is there that this witness exists, except that witnessing exists? This is an assumption we never even think to question, an assumption that we all completely take for granted: that for observing to exist requires an observer.
Seeing the labelling process happening is not easy because we blind ourselves to it in order to continue believing the story of self. Yet once the illusion of self is seen through, we have the power to stop and check how the labels appear. With practice, this too can become habit. Experience label check label-removal experience. But checking is just another part of life life-ing!
