How do you know that there is no “I”? You look for yourself and find out the truth of it. Otherwise it becomes another belief, and nothing changes.
It is not the “I” that is looking. Thinking that there is “I” that is looking is an illusion just an assumption that you must question.
There may be a sense that there’s an observer. You can’t shake it, and you assume it indicates an observer. Well, you can’t shake it, because it’s a feeling like any other. You don’t have to shake it. You don’t have to wrap your mind around it. You just have to see if there’s anything behind it.
How about not fabricating anything for a moment, and simply looking at what’s present right now? Do “you” exist at all?
How do you know there is a witness, apart from just the obvious process of witnessing or observation? How is there a witness as an entity? Where is it? Does it actually exist?
Is there such a thing as awareness in which things appear? Is awareness ever actually experienced, or is it just an idea, an abstraction? Does it actually exist?
Is there any other possibility for the present moment than what actually is present? Only the mind produces objections to what is. When these movements of the mind fall away, what is left?
Look at a cup or glass on your table. Is it truer to say that it is “a cup,” or a “my cup”? Where exactly does “a cup” become a “my cup”? What is the mechanism?
Are your thoughts possessive in nature? Do they always have an “I” attached to them? Or are some just thoughts? An example of this: look at your phone or tablet. Is it your device or just a device? If it is “yours,” how did it get to be yours? Try this on some other things in your life. Are they yours or just things?
If you write a name on a piece of paper, will the piece of paper be that name? If you get a pet and give it a name, will the pet be that name? Or will it just be a pet you named in that way? Was the pet breathing and eating and drinking before you gave it that name? And how about you. If you had another name, would you still be breathing and eating and drinking? If you had no name at all, would breathing, eating, and drinking still be happening? Breathing, eating, and drinking are happening to no one. They are just happening. There is nothing and nobody behind the experiencing.
Do you feel there is a self that is doing, feeling, thinking? The illusion is the belief in a “you” actually doing, feeling, or thinking anything. Look at your thoughts and see if you can control any thought. Is there a controller of thought? Is there a thinker? If you look carefully, you will realize there is nothing no “you” controlling or thinking. There is only thinking happening, plus the habit of thinking that there is a “you” who is thinking, doing, hearing, etc. Actually, everything is happening now out of nothing.
How about the body? Is that owned, in reality, by a “me”? As you move around in your ordinary life, check and see if you can find a “self” moving the body around walking, driving, typing, picking up a cup. Is there a “who” living your life? Or are there thoughts about everything, including a self, apparently living your life?
Are you really in control of the actions you experience? Do “you” send messages to your muscles telling them to operate? To your eyes telling them to see? To your brain telling it to understand? Do you tell the wind to blow or the sun to shine? Aren’t these happening all by themselves, without a story of “you” required to make them happen?
This is a process of subtraction. If we subtract the tendency to believe the “my-ification” labels on virtually everything, what is there? Take away the layers of story and habitual appropriation of experience, and what is there? Don’t even call it “my” awareness and “my” consciousness, and what is there? Don’t claim the movement of the body, and what moves there?
The self isn’t actually involved in the action. The thoughts sometimes seem to arise simultaneously, but after some practice, and while paying attention to it really carefully, you see there’s a moment after the action has happened but before the self kicks in to take ownership of it.
There is a feeling that there is a doer, but is it true? Keep looking. How does the doer manifest itself? In what way do you know that there is a doer?
Is there a witness? A looker, A see-er? An understander? What is here now?
What is the self? And where do you look to find it? What is a story made up of?
When you look for who is watching, you either do not know, or you come up with an idea, a thought-construct, a product of the imagination. Essentially “you” have no idea who or what you are, as all ideas of who or what you are, are imaginary.
Now in any circumstance, any situation, in the past or in an imagined future can there ever be a you which is not an idea, thought, or habit? In this very moment, is there a “you” which is not an idea? The truth is really simple and obvious. It takes a little courage to look, but once recognized it will become clear. Look in immediate experience. Is there a self, other than habitual thoughts of a self? Has there ever been anything but a story about you?
You don’t have to decide or believe anything at all. Just look at the evidence. In life, in all your actions, keep returning to this focus on the thoughts as you move around. Simply keep checking if there is something real, besides a thought that owns and directs the body.
There isn’t a you who thinks your thoughts. Don’t take my word for it. Just look. There was a time when it was “obvious” that the earth was at the center of the universe, until someone dared question this and turned out to be right.
Can you change your thoughts? Can you say, “I don’t like this thought, I think I’ll change it” and the first thought gets sent to the trash, never to bother you again? Or do thoughts simply show up, not controlled by a “you”? Can you choose your thoughts?
If the “I” is linked to the body, how so? Which part of the body contains “I”? If the body loses both legs and both arms, would there be a loss of the “I”? With your eyes closed, can you find a line between the body and what is outside the body? Where is “I” located?
If you think there is a “sense” of identity, where is it felt? How does it feel? Is it there if it’s not labeled and described by the mind? Can you find that sense of aliveness, of being (as a verb), and see if it is here if you don’t think about it? Is it personal? Where is the line between here and there?
The sense of being or aliveness plus the label “This is me” is what creates the illusion. Seeing that the label itself is not a real entity, to which life happens, breaks the spell.
Have you noticed that what happens, happens? That there is no control? What is breathing the body? What is beating the heart? What is living? Notice what is underneath the mind and emotions, under the stories, under the non-stop inner narrative. Is there anything at all? There has been much conditioning around this belief in a separate self. But notice. Is there anything there at all but life as a whole?”
Is there a witness behind thoughts, or is “I am witnessing” just another thought passing by effortlessly?
Is there such a thing as “awareness in which things appear”? Where is the division between awareness and appearances? There is no division between awareness and appearances. All that can be seen are appearances.
Mindfulness is direct experience fingers touching keys, ache in head, cramp in shoulders, view of screen, car going by, shaking of head, and so on. There is no sign of a “me” anywhere, although in this stream a thought may come, such as “I need to go get a birthday card.”
Look at a cup. It’s real. Even when you aren’t thinking about a cup, it’s still there. Now look at thoughts about the self. When you are not holding the story of “you” in your thoughts, is it still there? That is a hole in “your” experience, which the mind covers over by telling a story of supposedly seamless experience. However, experience is not seamless, we experience no self all through our day, yet the mind covers over the holes! It is seeing through those lies that lead us to discover there is only experience without a “you.”
Look again at what is happening. Can you actually see awareness is doing the looking? Or is awareness just another word for the looking happening? Look again. Is there something doing the looking?
What is consciousness and what makes consciousness “yours”?
Is there someone or something inside looking out and through, or can you only find the looking itself? Does seeing require a seer?
The I-thought pops up all the time, even in the most mundane activities. Question these thoughts “I am doing x,” “I am feeling y,” etc. See if there is ever any reality in these thoughts, if there has ever been any reality to them.
The truth is, there is no you or me. There is no self. There is no smaller self, there is no higher self. There is the universe unfolding. If you look closely, honestly, with integrity, and with a certain amount of dedication, it will be revealed that self, or sense of self, only resides in thoughts. Thoughts of a self do not point to a self, in the same way as thoughts of a unicorn do not point to an actual unicorn.
Have you noticed that the image you have of self and others is merely a thought? That it’s imaginary? You cannot actually know any other human being. All you can know is your story of them. And all they can know is their story of you. Who would you be without your story?
The process of feeling is real, the process of thinking is real, and the aliveness feeling is real. All experiences happen and are then very quickly labeled with the “I” thought to become labeled as “my” experiences. When a perception (an object of the senses or thought) appears, the “I” thought associated with the aliveness feeling appears. From these two succeeding thoughts appears a thought stating that the object is “mine” or “not mine” or “me” or “not me.” For example, you might look at the phone on the table, and immediately you get this thought, “My phone,” combined with the feeling of existing.
Notice another thing. Thoughts pass by not in knots, but in trains. One thought comes after another, but only one thought comes to awareness at a time. If it’s speedy and there are lots of thoughts, they may get labeled as a knot, but examine them with more depth and note what you find. And there is no center. There never was a center. All there is, is experience happening now plus the experience of thinking about it. If you had to point to a center, where would your finger point to? If there was a center, wouldn’t it be clear and obvious? It’s unclear because the mind is trying to recreate something that it imagines and believes to be real based on memories. Check if it’s true. Ask the center to reveal itself, literally. See what happens.
Without using thoughts and images (which are just thoughts in picture form) where exactly is the supposed “self”? Where is this self you are so sure is there? If it’s so obviously there, it should be findable.
If you were asked to find a unicorn, what would you do? Would you go on a quest to look for it? Would you search for it inside? Maybe look around the room? How do you know you cannot find a unicorn in real life?
Don’t try to look for what isn’t. Instead, turn your face to the truth, to the obvious. What is here right now?
Start looking, and by seeing reality you will answer your own questions.
When you forget to look during the day (which will probably be most of the time), it doesn’t matter. The “I” doesn’t become real only because you don’t think of it.
Look at it. How much of a self is truly needed in everything you do this day? That’s how you see through the illusion of a separate self that runs things. You look at how life actually is. In each moment. Not “about” life. Not the chatter in your head. What is happening moment-by-moment in real life? Hand moved. Eyes followed. Thought happens. Don’t let the voices in your head talk you out of it. Look!
Stop guessing and look! Even if your theory is correct, it doesn’t help if you don’t see it. When you are hungry and decide to eat, who decides to eat? You or your body? You or your thoughts? Can a “you” be hungry? Observe when the thought-commentary about actions sets in. Do you first think, “I will turn left”? Or do you turn left and then label this action in your thoughts, “I decided to turn left”? Pick apart all actions and thoughts, moment by moment.
Look for your “self,” and what do you find? Body and mind sitting here. Is the body real? Yes. Would “you” exist without thought? No. Is the body you? No. What is the “self”? A concept. What produces the concept? Thought. Are thoughts real? Yes. Is the content accurate? Sometimes. Is it real? No. Do you exist as a separate self?
There’s no “I” just what’s going on, right here and now. But how we complicate that. Seeing the “I” as only being just another thought among many thoughts is the key. And everyday life is still here and goes on.
Everything does what it is. A cat does what it is, and is what it does. There’s no “self” of a cat there telling the cat what it should or shouldn’t do. Look at a bird doing what a bird is. The bird doesn’t “do” singing; there is a birdsong and there is a bird. There is no cause there. It just is. It cannot help but be. The bird does choose to do singing; the cat doesn’t decide to do some stretching.
The lines we draw that separate a self exists, apart from the whole do they actually exist? In reality, is anything ever separate? How would that work?
Nothing is separate. Everything is joined. Life flows. Thoughts, emotions, and sensations come and go like clouds in the sky. None of them are to be taken seriously. Everything is happening at once without control or obstacles. Things just flow, light and free.
Can you tell if thoughts appear on automatic, or do you actually need to do something to make them come? Do thoughts control the body? Or are they just labeling what body does? Or perhaps body and mind are engaged in different activities most of the time? The body is here, doing its thing; the mind is somewhere else, dreaming of an imaginary future and remembering the past.
Notice your equivocal thinking, too. Vague ideas are vague, and you don’t have to commit to a falsehood.
Is there a self in direct experience? Can you find a “me” that is more than a thought? In your direct experience, is there a “me” that is “having” pain? “Having” an easy or not-so-easy life? Or do joy, pain, likes, dislikes, funny ideas, and angry moments just show up? Can you make them show up?
When emotions arise, check very carefully, and answer this: Except for my thoughts about it, am I okay in this moment? Check it!
Imagine sitting on the white sand of a beautiful Caribbean Island, sipping delicious drinks, and having a very pleasant time. Then notice that this is obviously imagination day-dreaming. Now look at the “I” thought, and feel it, and see that it comes exactly from the same place as that beautiful island imagination and day dreaming. There is no real entity called “I.”
What is the reality of this moment? We are completely supported by existence. Breathing is done, the heart beats, and this complex body functions. If we are cold, we pull on a sweater. If we are hungry, we go to the fridge. And for most of us reading this, we live in abundance. But we overlook this.
Belief in the existence of an “objective” perspective is something learned. It is cultural. And the objective perspective is considered superior. It certainly is a powerful concept. This is not about giving it up. It is about realizing that it is a concept. It is not experience. It is not real.
It is quite common to see through the illusion of self at one level and find that a more subtle version is being reconstituted in some form. It is as if something refuses to believe that this can be possible. Somewhere, there must be a little man running the show. On investigation, no little man is to be found, except as a bunch of thoughts about thoughts. It is a self-reflective loop, isn’t it?
Do you think that a real “you” is controlled by your mind? What can possibly be controlled by thought? The content of thought is entirely imaginary. How can something real be controlled by something imaginary? Who or what is being controlled? A thought-constructed being, a self-image? Look deeply at this.
How can you ever “control” your reactions? Don’t they arise naturally? Does the brain need a manager, in other words? Investigate here. Also watch how other people’s reactions arise when something happens.
It may seem that the story can be controlled. But when you look for what it is that supposedly makes the choices and tries to control the story, you can’t find it. Things just happen. Controlling or choosing also happens out of nothing, from nowhere. And it is only a thought-habit to assume that there’s a “me” doing the controlling.
Focus on the feeling of being, that which is always here. Just stay with it for a bit. Then notice how labels arise. Can you see how thoughts are? Look at the content of thoughts. They are just labels. They tell a story. And a story is always fiction.
Can a thought think? Can a thought feel? Can a thought become liberated?
What feels as though it is behind the illusion of the “I” is just what is really going on. Seeing things, hearing things, moving around. Life without “my” manipulation. Quiet. Space.
The only way “you” can go into time is in thought, in imagination, via an imaginary “you.”
The contents of the mind are nothing but thoughts. Can thoughts ever be real? Thoughts can be about the real or unreal, but thoughts themselves are never the real. If you don’t take their contents seriously, is there a problem with anything?
All our descriptions of life and reality are conceptual, arbitrary, and made up. But reality is non-conceptual. It just is. All explanations are bullshit. This doesn’t mean they’re not worthwhile, or that stories aren’t fun and entertaining. But this is all action and reaction, as neurons fire in the brain. The “I” is their product, not their cause. Everything is on automatic. There is one universal whole. No separation. No separation from life.
If there are no labels and there is just life, what happens to “my” life? Does life belong to a “me”? Can you sense, in any way, ownership of life? Is there a center if it’s not labeled “my center”? With closed eyes, find a center. Where is it? Can you find a line that divides here from there? If you hear a distant sound, is it heard inside the body or where it happens? If you were to take a finger and point to “my center” where would the finger end up pointing?
What moves? Everything. Everything moves; nothing is separate; everything moves and exists as one thing. You can pick out parts of the whole to focus on, like a bird or a cat, but they’re not truly separate from anything around them.
In looking, is there a looker? In choosing, is there a chooser? In witnessing, is there a witness? In thinking, is there a thinker? In writing, is there a writer? In perception, is there a perceiver? In experience, is there an experiencer? Is someone having the experience? Is life happening to someone or something, or is the experiencer merely a thought that happens within and as experience?
What is the “I” that gets lost in thought? Isn’t it just another passing thought? “I get lost in thought.” Can a thought get lost in thought?
Keep the focus on the obvious. You can never find an entity behind the word “I” because such an entity does not exist. All there is, is life happening by itself. Is it true?
The imaginary self is the result of thoughts, so a self could never control thoughts especially when they are about “you,” because that’s exactly the process that creates the construct called “self” in the first place. The self cannot simultaneously be created by and yet alter thoughts.
If it is in fact the case that everything is one, as in one, continuous, unbroken reality. How can there be someone to experience it, ever?
You need to see this, clearly and directly for yourself just like you see there is no Batman in this room now. Once you’ve seen it, no one will be able to convince you otherwise.
You are not who you think you are. Literally. Find out if you exist at all outside of thought. And what is left if you do not?
There’s no one to awaken or to see, just seeing happening and thoughts about it. And don’t worry about unseeing or somehow forgetting this you can’t. Anytime there’s a doubt, you can simply look.
Notice the thoughts and beliefs in your head that you think are you, and experience them as impersonal. No “me,” no struggle. Life lives. “I” doesn’t have to think. Thoughts unfold as needed. They always have. There is such quiet joy and deep peace in this.
Thoughts are like clouds, dark or white, scary or funny, sticking together or detaching from each other. Thoughts cloud the mind as they do the sky. By looking honestly, you will see that the sun is always shining beyond the veil. There is as much point in believing in clouds as there is in believing thoughts.
