Welcome to “Enlightening Quotes”, from Liberation Unleashed
The whole thing is as simple as this: There is no “I.” There is just what’s going on, here and now.
The “I” is not. It isn’t here. It’s absent. Zero, nada, zilch.
Experiencing is happening. To no one. It just is.
There is no self and never was. There is only life, arising or happening. You are not who you think you are (literally). “You” seem to exist because the thought “I” appears. Then you believe it, then it has a life, and then all of “your” life gets created. But that life is not you, and it is not who you really are. In reality, you are nothing and no one. Life is happening — and there is nothing outside of that. The illusion is that “you” are personal. Yet nothing can happen to “you” because there is no “you.” “You” can’t be harmed. The body can perish, but it’s not “your” body any more than a flower is “your” body — it’s the body of life.
“You” are not your body. Not your brain. Not your mind. Not your thoughts.
The mind is playing a great trick, in which it appears that the individual is the author of “their” life. Have you ever directly looked to find this “you” that is supposedly a separate entity that controls and directs your life? This “you” cannot be found. Life just happens by itself. You don’t exist separate from life as a whole. There is no loss experienced on seeing this.
You have been living your whole life thinking that you are in control. The truth is that you are not in control. More exactly, there is no “you” to be in control. Every action your body has taken, and every thought that has arisen in your mind, has happened without anyone behind the curtains making it happen. Everything that is within your experience is entirely a product of past events. Just as your heart beats without anyone’s approval, so your mind thinks without anyone’s approval, and your body acts without anyone’s approval. There is no “you” back there making it all happen. There isn’t even a “you” back there watching it all happen. Awareness is simply arising because the conditions are in place for awareness to arise.
The body and all physical objects exist in reality. But “self” is not the body. It is not an object; it does not exist in reality. There is no “self” separate from what’s happening, no little broken-off piece of life that is a special “me” that you own and can direct and control, separate from the whole.
There is no you at all nothing and no one behind experience, but always only the experience. There is no “you” out of which everything emanates. “You” have only ever been an idea, a notion, created out of nowhere.
We hold beliefs that we never even stop to think about or call into question. Often this is because we are not even aware that these are our beliefs. They are so deeply rooted that we take them for granted. “Self” is the Grand Poobah of these beliefs, the one that reigns over all others. But not for much longer. We are going to hold it up to the light and see it for what it really is.
There is no “you” here right now. You never existed. There is a body and a brain. That feeling of aliveness is not going to go away. Life will go on as it always has. The belief that there is a “you” that controls life can be seen as just that: simply a belief. Just as you no longer believe in Santa, when it is seen that the self is a fictional character, there will no longer be the belief that it is a real entity.
If you grew up with the Santa story, or some other magical story, do you remember how it was to realize the truth that the magical character did not exist in real life? That was seeing through illusion your parents caused you to believe. Similarly, this magical “I” or “me” cannot be found, but people still believe in it. Seeing the truth is simply dropping that belief. Life goes on as it always did, and no change is going to happen other than in the way life is perceived.
How big of a lie would it have to be, that billions of people throughout the ages would fail to see through it, even after it has been hinted at by countless spiritual traditions? It would have to be the last thing we would ever question an assumption we are so certain of that very few would have the nerve to question its certainty. Do you want to know what the lie is? It’s “you.” “You” are the hypothesis that cannot withstand direct observation.
This illusion is at the core of who you think you are and how your world is. It’s big! All the concepts you use every day and take for granted will be seen in a new light.
For an illusory separate self, there is loneliness, loss and suffering, as well as neediness and striving. So all our lives, from early childhood, we may be searching for the oneness we lost by falling under the illusion of being separate. We think that we are the thinker or the doer in our lives, not realizing that, like the rest of reality, we are simply life expressing itself. The mighty ego is not really in charge, or in control, or responsible for everything. The sages and teachers point the way, but in our delusion we misunderstand.
There is nothing wrong with you. The “you” that you think you are, you are not. What you are is nameless. You could call it “life itself” or “existence” or “presence” or “awareness” or nothing. You are already free. It is only a matter of seeing through the thought-illusion that makes you think you are in bondage. The bondage is not real. It is just a story. And you are not a story.
There is so much pain in identifying with a separate self, in believing that the story of “you” and “your” life has any substance worth holding on to. This makes misery, not only in the mind, but also in the body, because they are not separate. Untrue beliefs (such as believing in the value of worrying about the past or future) contract the system, and the body pays the price with tension and pain. Hell is not some place we might go when we die. Hell is right now; hell is believing that the stories in the mind are real. Relief from hell is seeing that there is no one here to take anything personally.
The key to eliminating suffering lies not in analyzing the contents of thoughts and feelings, nor in controlling, changing, or eliminating them. It is a matter of seeing through the belief in a separate self, which thinks it is having the experience in the first place.
Seeing no-self is like suddenly looking at your glass of wine, your bag of cocaine, or your needle of heroin, and in a moment of clarity thinking: “Why on earth would I want to do that? It’s not good for me,” then calmly putting down the intoxicant and walking away.
Creating an identity is a means to navigate in society, but it has no other purpose. To awaken is to realize that the stories we obsess over are a waste of energy.
A sense of self, like a sense of balance, can be a useful tool. An organism can orient in relation to complex environments, mapping danger and opportunity.
There is a sense of self, but that is all it is. After awakening, that sense remains, but you ultimately see through it as a mind-created illusion. It’s not you.
Everything we are attempting to become and do, and all ways in which we relate to others and the world, assume there is a separate self. This false assumption is so deeply unconscious, and so central to our interpretation of everything that is happening to us, that we are able to speak from its viewpoint at great length and still not see that we believe something that is untrue. This assumption must become conscious and it must be examined in the light of reality in order for the truth to be seen.
The brush cannot “own” the creation of the painting. And all the different “brushes” (humans) have their own unique ways: the thoughts they believe and the things they do. It brings such a beautiful palette or tone to the painting. They are “choosing” the colors to paint with, so to speak, but simultaneously have no choice in what’s been chosen.
There is no “me” in any shape or form, in reality. There can be a thought-created “I” in a story told about “me.” But the thought-created “I” doesn’t refer to anything at all. It’s just a thought.
Without a “me,” there is no longer the possibility of being hooked into the story that the “me” thought is real. With no “I” or “me,” there is peace and freedom.
Thoughts build a small me, a grandiose me, a miserable me, an awakened me. The variations are endless. And it doesn’t stop. Just as optical illusions keep working, the imaginary self keeps getting built. But that doesn’t make it real.
Realizing no-self means regaining innocence seemingly lost when falling into duality.
There is no self at all, already, and life is going on perfectly. Nothing is going to change here, because this is already the case.
Life goes on. Everything arises and passes away. Without identification, emotions pass more quickly, since they are free. Meeting everything that comes up with openness and with no resistance makes the whole experience of life a joyful ride, rather than the hard work in trying to control what is.
You will learn to observe how thoughts “sculpt” a self. Watching this happen is a lot more fun than feeling “you” are “drowning in thoughts”!
Thoughts cannot be owned. In fact, nothing can be owned, because there is no owner! The whole concept of ownership is a fallacy. The irony is that everyone behaves like an owner.
The “I” imagines it is the perceiver but we cannot locate this “I” anywhere, because it is just a thought. So essentially we realize that there is no separate perceiver, only perception itself. The illusion of separation between perception and perceiver is only an idea in the mind. There is no “me.”
This isn’t about making the sense of being alive stronger or more clearly experienced. It’s simply about seeing what is real.
This is not deep. It is not a trick, where “looking” means something out of the ordinary. It is just looking directly in your experience to see if whether there is a “you” doing the experiencing or whether experience is just being experienced.
Please don’t believe anything, but ruthlessly test it out for yourself. This is not about replacing one set of beliefs with another one. It is about checking out for yourself, in real life.What is it that actually exists?
We are not looking for a new belief here. We are pointing to an observable fact: that there is no “you” in reality. The only place you will find a “you” is in a story.
Nothing that is untrue can withstand the true it falls away.
Reality truth what is real can never NOT be abiding. No matter what.
This is all about seeing the truth. Now. Look for truth every moment. Scrutinize everything. Instead of planning and “doing” life, there is letting life unfold. Life invites you to a magnificent dance in every moment. It is awesome. The dance of doing the laundry, the dance of washing dirty feet, the dance of watching the news on television, all without resistance to what is. Life itself is a beautiful dance partner and the only guru you need.
If you’re interested, you can do this. There is a way to look at “your self” from every angle until the inescapable conclusion is reached that the “self” is just an idea. It isn’t real and never was. Once you see this, it’s over for that belief. Then your human energy and body and brain aren’t being consumed in the service of a lie. Life feels better and easier. If you have a sincere interest in this, you can do it.
