Do this little exercise. Close your eyes and imagine you are holding a watermelon in your hands. Imagine it so vividly that you can feel its weight, the shape and texture of the skin. Hold it there, sensing it, and open your eyes. What happened to a melon? How about the sensation that was so believable? That which is real can be sensed in one or more ways. That which is imagined exists only in the mind.
“You” don’t exist. The “you” that you think you are is just that thinking, thoughts. Not real. Not in control. Does a “you” do the breathing, or the thinking? Is a “you” really in control of anything? Examine thoughts and actions. What is really here? What is real? There is an experience of aliveness, but does that need to be labeled “me”? This identification with all these thoughts feels normal and familiar, but it is ultimately not real and is the cause of suffering. And it is so simple that it is overlooked.
Do you exist? There is no you. Look!
Look at a university. All it is, is a bunch of buildings, with certain types of people, with certain things being thought there. The label “university” is put on this area, and the feel of it being a university becomes very real, almost like an entity in itself. But there is only a bunch of buildings there. Now take your life, your limbs, head, brain, blood, guts, memories, thoughts, and feelings. All this stuff very much exists and is very real, but when all this stuff references itself and uses language like “me,” “myself,” and “I,” over time something that seems real appears, a feeling of ownership over all that a feeling of control, a feeling of “I am my name,” “This is me.” But truthfully, there’s nothing more there than the brain, the blood, the guts, the thoughts, the memories, and so on.
Much of this work consists of seeing how we get hooked by “our” thoughts. We examine these sharp, pointy, and sticky places. Just look in your direct experience and thought processes for the answers. Very simply: how do we “own” things? The screen you are reading on, is it a “your” screen or just “a” screen? Which seems more true? And why?
Is there a gap between the perceiver of thoughts thoughts and thinking or is there just one process that we call thinking? Test it with a sound. Stop everything for two minutes and listen intently to all sounds that are present. Is there a hearer of sounds, separate from hearing and the heard? Where does hearing happen? Listen to distant sounds. Where is the hearer then? With closed eyes, check if there is a line between here and there. Can it be defined?
What is happening in this moment? With your five senses, what do you experience? Sights, sounds, tastes, smells, tactile sensations, even thoughts. Just list up what there is, don’t draw conclusions.
Notice the sounds you’re hearing, like the chirping of the birds. Notice the habitual thought “I hear that.” Now just pay attention to how sound happens. Take your time with it. Are you doing the hearing, or is it just happening?
When smelling an object, what is real about the sense of smell? When does it start, and when does it end? What causes the experience?
When you observe a flower, is there any separation between you and the flower? How about with smelling experience? Try this with the music. Listen to the music not with your ears but with all your being. You will discover that you can’t truly listen and think at the same time. The slightest thought stops the natural flowing of the music.
For the time being, during this investigation, just look at how feelings, thoughts and labels show up. Don’t make the mistake of trying to change what is. Please don’t try to be “not me.” The “me” you are talking about doesn’t exist anyway.
How does your “I” work? Where did it come from? Is it the same “I” you were ten years ago? Where does it reside? Shift attention to seeing what is true about the sense of “you.” Stay focused as much as possible on investigating “you-ness.” Look now in your experience, and keep looking, at what “me” or “I” is, and relate what you see here. Really stay one pointed on that specific process.
When something appears, whatever it is, tension, desire, sound, anything focus on it with laser sharpness. Observe it before any thoughts about it appear. Is there an “I” before the thoughts appear, or does it come with the thoughts?
Sit quietly, wherever you are, and notice what is real: body, furniture, feelings, thoughts, sensations, surroundings. Can you find an “I” here? Or are there just thoughts, feelings, sensations?
When you open your eyes, what happens? Is there a “you” looking out of two holes in your head? Are you “doing” seeing? Or are the sights just here, without any boundary? Just clear unobstructed seeing. Check it!
A widely-held assumption is that, in order for looking to happen, there must be someone doing it, a looker. Right now, find out if this is in fact so. When I ask you, “Look at the object in the room you’re in,” what happens? Can you closely observe the process, and tell me if there is someone involved in this process at all someone that is not merely an assumption? Check it out!
There is no magic button, no affirmation or mantra, no secret knowledge. It is all out in the open. It’s simple, and it’s right under your nose. It’s so simple you are overlooking it. Right here, right now, sitting with your phone or tablet, point with your finger to “you.” Do it. Now look with your eyes at what the finger is pointing to. What is it? What do you actually see?
The lie resides right at your own center, at the place you call “I” or “me.” Investigate. Does the thought or sense of “I” point to a reality? Just like the word “rain” points to the wet stuff in your face, or the words “fear” and “joy” point to a set of body sensations? Or is it the case that the words “I” and “me” are just words, denoting nothing more real and solid than the name “Santa Claus”?
Can you see an absence of something? Let’s say there is a pen on your table. Look at it. Now take it and hide it behind your back. Look at the table again. Can you see an absence of pen? All you see is what is there, not what isn’t.
Sit down and examine your present experience. See if you can actually find a central entity, a “me” who is directing the whole show. Check out if you find a specific “me” who thinks thoughts, has feelings, or directs the processes of the body. Watch how you move through the day the movements of the body, the reactions to situations. You can only find this in your own direct experience of this moment.
Keep looking at your daily experiences. Look for the moment the “I” label gets attached to a movement, to “doing-ness.” There is an experience, and the thought comes up, “I” did it. Watch out for this. Be like a detective, ready to spot it! Experience happens, and a thought labels it.
All thoughts, feelings, and emotions are impersonal. Absolutely everything that is experienced is conditioned and changes. This mind-state that is experienced right now is changing. Wishing for it to be constant trying to make it constant is stressful.
Raise your right arm (or don’t). In that process of raising the right arm or not, a decision is made, or at least something happens (or doesn’t). But can you pinpoint the actual moment of choice and find the actual entity that appears to be making that choice? In direct experience, can that moment of choice, that apparent chooser, actually be found? Or does the idea “I just chose to (not) raise my right arm” come after the event itself?
Now raise your left hand above your head. Do it. How did that happen? What was that made the choice to do it? Is it possible that the choice was already made, and thought came in later? Watch closely the relation between what is happening and how thoughts label it.
Let’s look at the body and see if there is an owner or entity controlling it. Lift one of your hands. Either one. Move it to the right. Now move it left. Look with your eyes at what is happening. Did a “self” move the hand? Or did the hand just move?
Try raising your hand again. Look at it very closely. Did a thought “own” that? Was it a self that chose to do that? Now, pretend someone just threw a ball at your head. Watch the hand move, very quickly. Does the hand “choose” to come up and catch the ball? Or does it just rise and catch it, without a thought? Now, raise your hand and move it to the left, then to the right. Watch the thoughts. Look for a self, something which is not just a thought, which is able to move your hand. Check and see where a story attaches to that thought, where “I raise my hand” comes in. Before, during, or after the raising?
Drop this clinging to a control you never had.
Who are you? Now look behind that. And behind that. And behind that. Which is more real: the first answer, or the way beyond answer?
Is there an inside and outside? Is there a separate self at all? What is the self? Dissect it, take it apart, deconstruct it completely. What is the “I” made of? What keeps it together and operational?
