There are raw experiences: hearing, seeing, touching, smelling, and tasting. There are sensations in the body (hunger, thirst, or pain). This is what we refer to as direct experience. This is the level of experience of cats, dogs, birds, and newborn babies. Then there are thoughts. Thoughts layer concepts over these raw experiences. A thought or concept or label is never the actual. Some thoughts point to the actual, and some point to other thoughts. This is the realm of make-believe. This is the realm of “I.” Is there an “I” in direct experience?
When you stay with your immediate, direct experience, you perceive only sights, sounds, smells, taste, sensations, thoughts, and emotions. None of those experiences belongs to you. They start belonging to you only when a “my” or “mine” arise.
You can sense the environment. You can sense aliveness. If you stop thinking, aliveness is still there. Being-ness is still there. We are talking about direct experience here. Don’t theorize. Look.
Stay with bare observation and what is actually seen. Really try to describe what that false sense of self is. Is it really false? Does it seem true? If this launches you into a present-moment investigation, go with it. Act like your own scientist. Verify whatever you can by observation.
Try to keep an open mind. Look at direct experience. How do you choose which thoughts come into existence? And where do thoughts come from? Then start looking at the rest of the illusion of self emotions and sensations in the body. Did you bring them into existence? What about the story of “you.” Is it real?
What happens as you directly observe thoughts and actions is very simple. Life carries on without thoughts about it. Movement occurs before its appropriation in thought the “my-ification” of pretty much everything. An “I” gets attached to everything in “my” world.
Is it not possible that all this happens without an “I” attached? It is a habit and language is like a rutted road. It has an “I” buried so deeply in each narrative and story and general assumption that it is difficult to get the wheels out of the rut and drive on the road!
What is the “I”, the “self”? Take a look and see if you can find a self. Is it “you” that is thinking? Watch your thoughts, and see if you can find the thinker. Watch your actions, and look for the doer. You will start to realize that thinking is happening on its own, that having control of thoughts is another illusion. Thoughts arise from your mind, which has a lifetime of training in how to think, what is important to pay attention to, as well as all the information from the past and hopes or fears for future, and attention to how others are possibly perceiving you. This large and complex program is running itself. There is no “I” making it happen. Actions arise on their own, too. There is no doer deciding what to do, even though it appears as if there is. Doing happens, walking happens, speaking happens no doer involved. And if there is no self, there is also no other. There is just life in another embodiment, the same life that is expressing itself through you.
Close your eyes and search for the boundary of “you.” With your eyes closed, where do you end and where does the world begin? With your eyes closed, are you aware of a boundary between the skin and clothes, or is this only a kind of blurry sensation? When you open your eyes, what happens? Is there a “you” looking out of two holes in your head? Are you doing the seeing? Or are the sights just here, without any boundary?
Here and now is there inner and outer in the experience?
Do you know what perception is and how it works? Perception is a collection of memories that massages the data received when a stimulus occurs, before the data go to the brain for processing. Perception is that frame of reference, the bias we all develop that judges and alters our experiences. And because every stimulus creates data that are perceived before being sent to the brain for processing, we can never actually see reality for what it is, our perception will always shape our experience to fit our memories.
This sense of self is an artifact of thought: thoughts about feelings about thoughts.
Sit with this possibility: there are lots of unexamined beliefs and concepts that are not necessary for life. Keep looking into direct experience, and see how things just unfold, and how the mind operates as a translator of what is going on, as a concept-maker. Sometimes this is useful, but sometimes it is just a distortion of reality.
Everything is happening by itself, including looking and seeing through illusion. Notice this. There is no effort, only thought about effort. Notice that there’s no one looking, but only looking and seeing happening.
There is no one inside you that is what you think of as “me.” No one that acts; no one that thinks. Only acting, thinking, and happening as a flow.
Thoughts are real. The thinker is not real. There are only thoughts passing by, like clouds in the sky.
What is being aware? Is anything being aware? Is anything doing the being aware?
What happens if we turn “awareness being aware of itself” into simply “aware-ing”? Life is not a noun, but a verb. Life life-ing, happening. By the very nature of the different experiences happening, the flavor of each is different. But all are manifestations of life. The subject-object division collapses. All that’s left is the experience.
There is no one liking lollipops, but the enjoyment of lollipops is happening. The existence of lollipop-liking doesn’t imply the existence of a liker.
If snow falls from the sky, who is doing the falling? No one, the snow is just falling. If wind blows through the trees, who is doing the blowing? No one, the wind is just blowing. If thoughts run through the mind, who is doing the running? No one, the thoughts are just thinking. If awareness is aware of a tree, who is being aware? No one, awareness is just happening. If life is being lived, who is doing the living? No one, life is just living.
Watch the sea. Waves come and go, each one unique. Some are quiet, some splash and spray, but all return to the sea. Human beings come and go in the same way. The sky without labels looks like life, like the ocean. Look at that and feel the spaciousness of it all.
Everything is conceptual except direct experience. When I ask if you can make a true statement solely based on direct experience, I am trying to get you to question the reliability and credibility of the content of thoughts. If direct experience is the only real thing, what does that tell you about the contents of thoughts?
Observe thoughts. Just close your eyes for a moment and notice. They come, one by one, a never-ending river of thoughts, labeling everything that is being felt, sensed, experienced.
What is a thought? Can you touch it, can you hold it, can you show it? Where do thoughts come from, and what decides which thought will come up next? Where do thoughts go when they disappear? Examine in detail how a thought works. What is noticing? Does the noticing happen also between thoughts when there are no thoughts and if so, are thoughts what you are?
Some thoughts point to real things: computer, desk, body. Other thoughts point to imaginary things: Batman, Santa, self. The thought itself is real, we experience it in reality. But the content of the thought is an image literally, imaginary. When you think of a cup, you have an image of the cup in mind, but you cannot pour tea into it or drink out of it.
Examining thoughts and their contents is pointless. It is completely pointless unless you see there is no self experiencing them unless you bring your attention to just that.
What happens as you directly observe thoughts and actions is very simple. Life carries on without thoughts about it. Movement occurs before its appropriation in thought the “my-ification” of pretty much everything. An “I” gets attached to everything in “my” world.
How about the subtle witness? Witnessing, focusing, intending, inspiring, observing, and watching are all processes that have no subject, no doer. Every form of identification is assumed, mostly due to language.
There is no hierarchy of thoughts. There is not one thought thinking the others. Thoughts cannot think.
The belief in a “you” that has to protect your interests functions like Velcro. Thoughts stick to this “you” and feed on each other. There is nothing but these thoughts no “you” at their core.
See if thoughts really are in anyone’s control. Really look at the process. How are you choosing to think or not think them? Is that in itself not a thought? There are present circumstances, past experiences, and patterns or conditioning of the mind. All these lead to a thought arising. Is there really someone in there controlling what you should focus on, what to decide, etc? Watch it carefully.
When we look at thoughts, we find we really can’t control our thoughts. There may be seeming control, but no real control and we don’t know really where they come from. They just happen, arising out of nowhere. All come, then go. They are not really “ours.”
Thoughts are possessive in nature. They divide everything up into what is good or bad for “you,” or what is neutral. The neutral stuff is discarded right away. The thoughts refer to objects as either “mine” or not. Of course, being thoughts, they can only infer possession, not create it.
You separate one cup from all the other cups in the world, and make it “my” cup, with a thought. In reality, there is no boundary between “my” and “not-my.” A cup has no intrinsic nature or quality that makes it “yours.” None. We create a whole self-centered world with this kind of thinking.
The illusion of a separate self happens when you identify with your experience. The process of identification involves believing that there is an “I” that experiences phenomena. For example, there is identification if you believe that when a sound arises, there is an “I” that hears the sound. In reality, through direct experience, you can see that there is just hearing of the sound. The addition of an “I” that hears the sound is merely conceptual and is unnecessary.
“I am space,” “I am awareness,” “I am consciousness,” “I am (you name it, random feeling, thought sensation).” Can you see how the “I” in any such sentence is entirely superfluous and never actually found in experience? When the “I” is removed from all these sentences, the description of what is really experienced is true.
Listen to a sound. What is hearing the sound? “I am” is simply a thought. Observe the direct experience of hearing the sound.
The direct experience of music is so different from the mind coming in afterward and trying to describe it. Music is hard to describe. When music is heard, no one hears it. It is an experience of hearing. There is no gap: sound and hearing arise simultaneously. What was it that heard the music? “Nothing heard the music” is the most accurate way to put it.
You won’t know what masters are talking about until you take a look for yourself. Thinking is not looking.
